---
title: 'Oxford Study: A Statistical Exploration of Intermarriage in the United States'
date: 2024-08-15
permalink: /posts/2024/08/oxford-study/
tags:
---

The term "Oxford Study" has become a common stereotype to refer to the commonality of heterosexual relationships between White men and Asian women. I investigate the merit of stereotype using 2022 IPUMS data and foundational statistical methods. 

Motivation
======
I recently came across an Instagram Reel posted by a dating app targeting Asian individuals explaining and critiquing the "Oxford Study" stereotype. The post's top comment, which was liked by the poster, caught my attention. The user wrote:
> It's not a stereotype. It's literally empirical evidence. A stereotype would be saying Asian[s] are bad drivers--there's no statistical evidence to support that at all. 

Replies spurred further debate, with many responses becoming distasteful and racially charged. This observation raised my curiosity in exploring the merits and demerits of this stereotype. Does there truly exist so-called "empirical evidence" supporting the stereotype as the commenter claims? How common are White men and Asian women couple pairings relative to other interracial couple pairings, and what differentiates them from other pairings? How common is intermarriage among Asian women relative to Asian men? Can the data explain why people think the way they do about "Oxford Study" couples and why the stereotype may have formed? 

To be clear, my goal is not to explain partner preferences among any race or sex group nor to discuss related sociological, psychological, or historical ideas. While I have not explored these areas in detail, many scholars in those respective fields and creators on TikTok, Instagram, and YouTube, have covered these topics extensively. Rather, I intend to use available data to comment on the characteristics of the couple pairings between White men and Asian women and how they differ from same-race and other mixed-race couple pairings.

Definitions
------
Despite widespread knowledge and use of the phrase, there is little consensus on the definition of the term "Oxford Study" and definitions seem to differ widely across platforms and demographic groups. The most [popular definition]((https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Oxford%20study)) on Urban Dictionary appears to be the one embraced by online "activist" communities like the subreddit r/aznidentity:
> When an Asian woman/girl only goes after mid (average or poor quality) white guys. They'll typically be the most beautiful girl you've ever seen.

This definition captures the attitude of men of color, particularly Asian men, who believe the pairing between White men and Asian women to be ["degrading"](https://www.reddit.com/r/aznidentity/comments/1bswgu7/degrading/). A major advantage of this definition is that it highlights a key characteristic of the stereotype which generates a sense of mild indignation among men of color: that Asian women pursue "mid," or average, often from the perspective of physical attractiveness, white men. Answering why this might be the case is beyond the scope of this exploration, and I leave that to the psychologists, sociologists, and others. 

Another definition is a sentiment captured in pieces like this article by Steffi Cao in [The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/article/2024/jun/12/asian-women-dating-white-men-fake-oxford-study): 
> An academic study out of Oxford University... [which] explores why Asian women... date white men instead of men of color. In most cases, the use of "Oxford Study" takes on an ugly tone.

Writing from the female perspective, Cao points out such a study (*the* Oxford Study) from Oxford University does not actually exist. Others have reported similar findings. Indeed, from a bystander's perspective, the term "Oxford Study" has a connotation of bitterness or envy, though the intent of those using the phrase on social media is unclear.

One of the most comprehensve definitions which both defines the term but also explains its origin comes from Urban Dictionary:
> Typically used to describe a White Male-Asian Female (WMAF) interracial relationship couple. The phrase is used in an ugly tone to describe this type of couple as the phenomena is *common, widespread*, and [has] reasonings... complex and deep rooted [requiring] an academic study at the highest level i.e., at Oxford... [to explain]. This term has originated from TikTok and was used since COVID lockdown but became more known in 2023. You also see this comment commonly on Instagram Reels and less commonly [on] Facebook/Twitter. 

Implicit in the previous two but expilcit in the above definition is the belief couple pairings between White men and Asian women are *common* and *widespread*, though it is difficult to find evidence supporting this position with a quick Google search. 

Data 
======
I use demographic and socioeconomic data pulled from the IPUMS sample of the 2022 5 year American Community Survey (ACS). IPUMS sample weightings (PERWT for individual estimates; HHWT for household estimates) are used to estimate characteristics for the US population. 

Time series data for intermarriages may more carefully detail changes in socioeconomic characteristics over time (i.e., difference in income, employment status). I leave this problem for further research. For now, the year of marriage variable (YRMARR) is sufficient in detailing the change in frequency of intermarriages over times. 

Exploration 
======
Several key questions arose after briefly exploring the data, combing through definitions, social media, and the academic literature, and speaking to peers:
1. **(Prevalence)** How common are relationships between Asian women and White men? Are they as prevalent in the United States as many believe them to be? 
2. **(Gender)** What are the differences in interracial and interethnic relationship frequency between Asian men and Asian women? Is it true Asian women enter relationships with extra-racial/extra-ethnic individuals more often than Asian men? 
3. **(Identity)** What characterizes relationships between Asian women and White men, and are they any different than other interracial or interethnic relationships? 

Literature
-----
While there is limited academic literature on this specific area of interracial partner preferences, some work provides a solid foundation for answering these questions. 

First, statistical analysis suggests White-Asian relationships are not as common as many make them out to be. [Johnson and Krieder (2013)](https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/working-papers/2013/demo/interracialmarriages-paa2013-final.pdf) examined the geographic distribution of interracial and interethnic ("intermarriage") marriages in the United States using data from the 2010 Decennial Census, finding seven pairings accounted for 94% of all intermarriages. Relationships between White and Asian individuals, gender not being specified, were the third most common type of intermarriage, comprising 13.7% of intermarriages and ~1.3% of all marriages. The spatial distribution of White-Asian marriages "mirror[s] residence patterns of Asians in the United States" at the county level, with four of the top five counties with highest proportions of White-Asian marriage being in Hawaii (Honolulu, Kauai, Hawaii, and Maui). [Rico et al. (2018)](https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/working-papers/2018/demo/SEHSD-WP2018-11.pdf) supplement Johnson and Kreider by analyzing data from 2000 to the 2012-2016 5-year ACS and found an increase in White-Asian marriages from 2010 to the 2012-2016 ACS of 1.2%±0.1% to 14.4% while remaining the third most common type of intermarriage behind Non-Hispanic White-Hispanic (any race) and one spouse reporting multiple races (more on this later). 18.7% of US counties observed an increase in the frequency of White-Asian marriages, though Rico et al. do not provide any additional detail. [Taylor et al. (2012)](https://www.pewresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2012/02/SDT-Intermarriage-II.pdf) also noted Asians were more likely to marry someone of a different race or ethnicity, with 27.7% of Asian newlyweds marrying outside of their own race (followed by Hispanics at 25.7%). 

Second, Asian women appear to enter extra-racial/extra-ethnic relationships more frequently than their male peers. A review of 2010 Decennial Census Data by Taylor et al. found Asian women were more than twice as likely (26.1%) to marry someone outside their own race than Asian men (16.6%). Additionally, segmenting by nativity produces similar results. While Native-born Asian (Asian-American) men are more likely to marry someone of a different race or ethnicity than their foreign born peers (32% vs 11%), native- and foreign-born Asian women are both more likely then Asian men to marry someone of a different race (43% and 34%, respectively). [Balisteri et al. (2015)](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26549919/) noted Asian men were less likely than men of all other racial and ethnic groups to be currently involved with a romantic partner. Additionally, Balisteri and authors write, "white black, and Hispanic women generally resembled their male counterparts in their levels of [partnership], but Asian women were half as likely as Asian men to be unpartnered (i.e., 18% vs 35%)." Despite this, [Fong and Yung (1995)](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.17953/amer.21.3.e848848100466113) reported a similar level of interest of Asian men and women in intermarriage, though these findings may be outdated. 

Last, qualitative evidence points to an imbalance in economic positioning within relationships between Asian women and White men beginning with the dating preferences of Asian women, though there is little research on the quantitative evidence for this perspective. Asian women interviewed by [Nemoto (2006)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Tx5V79HwBn9DtxdlQumGUZxz4t597y4a/view) expressed an interest in White men in part stemming from the appeal of material security and economic status. 

Literature
-----
There is little work 